This directory contains data for this project and scripts for obtaining - and cleaning NHGRI data. __prepare_data.sh__ will download the NHGRI GWAS catalog and archive every version in the __catalog_archive__ folder. The most _recent_ version of the gwas catalog is __gwascatalog.txt__.# Data Set Notes## NHGRI CatalogThe __NHGRI__ catalog contains _1788_ unique publications as of 1/28/14.## OMIM####__The OMIM dataset needs to be reviewed further.__OMIM (Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man) is a comprehensive, authoritative compendium of human genes and genetic phenotypes that is freely available and updated daily.The value of the OMIM dataset is seeing how many complex disorders have associations linked with...#### Data CleaningOMIM data was obtained from OMIM ftp servers. Omim stores several different 'types' of entries - including diseases with unknown phenotypes, genes with unknown diseases, and disease-gene linked entries.Disease-gene entries were filtered for in the __mim2gene.txt__ file. The data regarding associated diseases can be at times heterogenous.## GO Annotations* There are 13,855 unique GO Terms.* There are 205,337 Go Annotations for human genes.### Data Cleaning* Gene Ontology (Gene) - Entrez Gene Database mappings were downloaded from NCBI.* Because there are 13K unique GO Terms - I decided to filter terms that were used to annotate less than 50 genes. This left 586 GO terms.* The list of Gene - GO associations was reshaped using Python (pandas.pivot). The result is a list of every gene and 586 columns (one for each GO term)## Kegg Pathways# Data Dictionary<table>	<tr>		<th>			Variable		</th>		<th>			Description		</th>		<th>			Comments		</th>		<th>			Done?		</th>		<th>Key - For Dataset</th>	</tr>	<tr>		<td>			DATE ADDED TO CATALOG		</td>		<td>			Date Added		</td>		<td>			Convert to date format		</td>		<td>			X		</td>		<td></td>	</tr>	<tr>		<td>			PUBMEDID		</td>		<td>			PubMed identification number		</td>		<td></td>		<td></td>		<td></td>	</tr>	<tr>		<td>			FIRST AUTHOR		</td>		<td>			Last name of first author		</td>		<td></td>		<td></td>		<td></td>	</tr>	<tr>		<td>			DATE		</td>		<td>			Publication date (online (epub) date if available)		</td>		<td>			Convert to Data Format		</td>		<td>			X		</td>		<td></td>	</tr>	<tr>		<td>			JOURNAL		</td>		<td>			Abbreviated journal name		</td>		<td>Convert to Factor Format</td>	</tr>	<tr style='color:red;'>		<td>			LINK		</td>		<td>			PubMed URL		</td>		<td>Drop; Standard Format</td>	</tr>	<tr>		<td>			STUDY		</td>		<td>			Title of paper (linked to PubMed abstract)		</td>		<td></td>	</tr>	<tr>		<td>			DISEASE/TRAIT		</td>		<td>			Disease or trait examined in study		</td>		<td>Convert to factor format</td>		<td>-</td>		<td>Omim</td>	</tr>	<tr>		<td>			INITIAL SAMPLE SIZE		</td>		<td>			Sample size for Stage 1 of GWAS		</td>		<td></td>	</tr>	<tr>		<td>			REPLICATION SAMPLE SIZE		</td>		<td>			Sample size for subsequent replication(s)		</td>		<td></td>	</tr>	<tr>		<td>			REGION		</td>		<td>			Cytogenetic region associated with rs number (NCBI)		</td>		<td></td>	</tr>	<tr>		<td>			REPORTED GENE (S)		</td>		<td>			Gene(s) reported by author		</td>		<td></td>	</tr>	<tr>		<td>			MAPPED GENE(S)		</td>		<td>			Gene(s) mapped to the strongest SNP (NCBI). If the SNP is located within a gene, that gene is listed. If the SNP is intergenic, the upstream and downstream genes are listed, separated by a hyphen. Gene info is linked to Entrez Gene.		</td>		<td></td>	</tr>	<tr>		<td>			DOWNSTREAM_GENE_ID:		</td>		<td>			Entrez Gene ID for nearest downstream gene to rs number, if not within gene (NCBI)		</td>		<td></td>	</tr>	<tr>		<td>			SNP_GENE_IDS		</td>		<td>			Entrez Gene ID, if rs number within gene; multiple genes denotes overlapping transcripts (NCBI)		</td>		<td></td>		<td>X</td>		<td>GO Annotation</td>	</tr>	<tr>		<td>			UPSTREAM_GENE_DISTANCE		</td>		<td>			distance in kb for nearest upstream gene to rs number, if not within gene (NCBI)		</td>		<td></td>	</tr>	<tr>		<td>			DOWNSTREAM_GENE_DISTANCE		</td>		<td>			 distance in kb for nearest downstream gene to rs number, if not within gene (NCBI)		</td>		<td></td>	</tr>	<tr>		<td>			STRONGEST SNP-RISK ALLELE		</td>		<td>			SNP(s) most strongly associated with trait + risk allele (? for unknown risk allele). May also refer to a haplotype. SNP info is linked to dbSNP.		</td>		<td></td>	</tr>	<tr>		<td>			SNPS		</td>		<td>			Strongest SNP; if a haplotype is reported above, may include more than one rs number (multiple SNPs comprising the haplotype). Asterisk indicates that the published rs number has since been merged with a different rs number (linked to current record in dbSNP).		</td>		<td></td>	</tr>	<tr>		<td>			CONTEXT		</td>		<td>			SNP functional class (NCBI)		</td>		<td></td>	</tr>	<tr>		<td>			RISK ALLELE FREQUENCY		</td>		<td>			Reported risk allele frequency associated with strongest		</td>		<td></td>	</tr>	<tr>		<td>			SNP		</td>		<td></td>	</tr>	<tr>		<td>			P-VALUE		</td>		<td>			Reported p-value for strongest SNP risk allele (linked to dbGaP Association Browser)		</td>		<td></td>	</tr>	<tr>		<td>			P-VALUE (TEXT)		</td>		<td>			Information describing context of p-value (e.g. females, smokers). Note that p-values are rounded to 1 significant digit (for example, a published p-value of 4.8 x 10-7 is rounded to 5 x 10-7).		</td>		<td></td>	</tr>	<tr>		<td>			OR or BETA		</td>		<td>			Reported odds ratio or beta-coefficient associated with strongest SNP risk allele		</td>		<td></td>	</tr>	<tr>		<td>			95% CI (TEXT)		</td>		<td>			Reported 95% confidence interval associated with strongest SNP risk allele		</td>		<td></td>	</tr>	<tr>		<td>			PLATFORM (SNPS PASSING QC)		</td>		<td>			Genotyping platform manufacturer used in Stage 1; also includes notation of pooled DNA study design or imputation of SNPs, where applicable		</td>		<td></td>	</tr>	<tr>		<td>			CNV		</td>		<td>			Study of copy number variation (yes/no)		</td>		<td></td>	</tr></table>